LibVMI Events
Author: Steven Maresca <steve@zentific.com>
Author: Tamas K Lengyel <tamas.lengyel@zentific.com>
Document: version 1.3, 2017-07-27
Relevant LibVMI release: 0.11

Overview:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beginning in release 0.10, LibVMI offers event monitoring for live virtual
machines: the delivery of as-it-happens data and the ability to execute
user-provided code upon receipt of an event.  This capability should greatly
improve long-term guest observation by reducing the necessity to poll
continuously to detect change of state.

Currently only the Xen Hypervisor provides these features, and some of these
are specifically only available on Intel CPUs. Certain events are also
supported on ARM CPUs.

In particular, LibVMI now supports the following for hypervisor drivers which
provide the requisite features:
    Memory events to observe read, write, and/or execute operations on specific
     regions of memory.
    Register events to observe read and write access to specific VCPU
     registers, including CR0, CR3, CR4, MSR registers, IDTR, LDTR, GDTR and TR
    Single-step events for each instruction executed upon a VCPU/set of VCPUs
     using the Monitor Trap Flag Intel-feature.
    Interrupt events (e.g., INT3)
    CPUID events
    Debug exception events, such as hardware breakpoints and singlestepping
    Privileged call events, currently only the execution of SMC on ARM

This new set of features is made possible by the flexibility of modern
hypervisors, which provide rich access to their internal facilities. In
general, as a consequence of their intended use, all provide the
mechanisms necessary to offer some variety of event observation and
interposition. In many ways, these hypervisor facilities mirror their analogues
in operating systems: both provide virtual addressing, memory paging,
etc. to provide separation between processes and, equivalently, between VMs.
These operate upon the same principles: page faults, interrupts, and the like.

In a somewhat unique context for hypervisors, to achieve virtualization on
platforms like x86, some sensitive or protected instructions must be trapped
or emulated (see also Popek and Goldberg's "Formal Requirements for
Virtualizable Third Generation Architectures"). In the case of x86, this is
called a VMEXIT - an interruption of execution to provide a hypervisor an
opportunity to handle the protected or sensitive instruction. If a hypervisor
reports the type of event causing the VMEXIT or page fault, all necessities
for event reporting for introspection are satisfied.

                                    ---

Specifics:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the case of Xen, a ring buffer is provided to hold VM events for consumption
by an external service which accesses this buffer from an observation VM.

Within its Xen driver, LibVMI enables event delivery when the initialization
mode has the VMI_INIT_EVENTS mode set:

    vmi_init_complete(&vmi, vm_name, VMI_INIT_DOMAINNAME | VMI_INIT_EVENTS,
                      NULL, VMI_CONFIG_GLOBAL_FILE_ENTRY, NULL, NULL))

Using LibVMI events is possible in four general steps:
    1) The allocation of an event structure to configure delivery of
        events (frequency, synchronous vs asynchronous, access mode, callback).
        Specific options for configuration are event-specific.
    2) The registration of this event with LibVMI via vmi_register_event().
        Upon receipt of an event matching one configured via vmi_event_t,
        it is passed to the configured callback.
    3) Invocation of the LibVMI function vmi_events_listen() which checks for
        incoming events and, if found, passes each to the appropriate callback.
        The event passed to its registered callback is augmented with
        information aiding in its interpretation (e.g., the page upon which
        a write operation was invoked, the VCPU used to execute an
        instruction, and/or the relevant instruction pointer.
    4) When use of the events subsystem has completed, unregistration of
        an individual event must be performed via vmi_clear_event or
        implicitly via vmi_destroy at program exit.

An example vmi_event_t allocation and subsequent configuration is shown below.
For full demonstrations, please consult the examples/ directory within the
LibVMI source tree.

    vmi_event_t *cr3_write_event = calloc(1, sizeof(vmi_event_t));
    cr3_write_event->version = VMI_EVENTS_VERSION;
    cr3_write_event->type = VMI_EVENT_REGISTER;
    cr3_write_event->reg_event.reg = CR3;
    cr3_write_event->reg_event.in_access = VMI_REGACCESS_W;
    cr3_write_event->callback = cr3_change_cb;

  Where cr3_change_cb is a pointer to a function with the prototype:
    void callback_name(vmi_instance_t vmi, vmi_event_t *event)
  All event callbacks must use this prototype; its return is not inspected
    by the vmi_events_listen() after invocation.

After creation, an event must be registered:

    vmi_register_event(vmi, cr3_write_event);

Next, the library user must await event delivery (exiting if interrupted
by a signal or other error/exit condition):

    while(!interrupted){
        vmi_events_listen(vmi, 1000);
    }

Finally, the library user MUST call vmi_destroy(vmi) upon exit. While this
action will cleanly unregister for all events, it is also recommended that
the library user call vmi_clear_event for each event structure when event
listening has concluded. This operation will unregister for the given event
type and remove the pointer to the event from tracking structures within
LibVMI.  For some event types, vmi_event_clear may be required within the
callback to ensure VM execution continues (though the same event structure
can be re-used and re-registered as needed).

NOTE:
   All memory management of vmi_event_t structures is the responsibility
   of the library user - LibVMI only tracks pointers to these structures.

                                    ---

Warnings:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1) Ensure VM consistency
Use of events, especially synchronous events (which are the default) will by
definition and design suspend the execution of the originating virtual machine.
This operation is performed by the hypervisor itself and effected by pausing the
specific VCPU related to the page fault or VMEXIT.

This provides a consistent state for an event callback to inspect. Without
pausing the VCPU, the callback might not have an opportunity to gather
requisite information to determine the conditions that caused the event. In
other terms using an example, without this pause, it could become impossible to
determine which process wrote a byte to a particular page or register (this
information would be lost as the VM continues to execute).

If extreme care is not taken to ensure a consistent VM, it is possible
to cause a VM to crash, suspend indefinitely, become corrupted, or enter an
otherwise unrecoverable state. Example scenario: a segmentation fault within
user code causes vmi_destroy() not to be invoked while events are pending and
unacknowledged; VCPUs have been paused by the event delivery, and the unclean
exit of the process leaves the VM in an invalid state.

2) Memory event delivery and page permissions
If a memory event has been registered, page permissions have been necessarily
modified to ensure event delivery from the hypervisor memory management layer.
Upon receipt of a related event, it is necessary that the page permissions be
modified so that the action (write, execute, and/or read) may complete;
otherwise, the action will continue to be attempted and will never succeed.
This would effectively halt execution of the VM in perpetuity.

A possible way to allow the VM to progress and catch all subsequent memory
events on the page can be done by the use of single stepping. By calling the
function vmi_step_mem_event() the user can instruct LibVMI to re-register the 
memory event after the required number of instructions have executed on the
vCPU. For example, stepping a single instruction ensures that the instruction
that was cought using the memory event can finish but all subsequent memory
events are cought.

3) Performance
Some event types, such as single stepping, have extreme performance impact
and should be used sparingly. The transition from VM to hypervisor at VMEXIT
is normally infrequent, but use of single-step events causes it every
instruction. As this subsequently causes execution to halt until an event
acknowledgement unpauses the VCPU, execution speed can and will drop to
a fraction of native performance.

                                    ---

Limitations:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1) General support of hypervisors

For 0.10+, only the Xen driver provides event capabilities; regrettably, such
events are not available in a useable fashion for KVM. However, if upstream KVM
and QEMU developers provide the ability to do so, LibVMI developers will add
support as soon as possible. (NOTE: KVM by design does make this type of event
observable; however, access to this information is limited to the 'owner' of a
virtual machine handle. This ultimately means that only QEMU - the process that
launched the virtual machine - is able to access this information. Lacking
a mechanism to provide access to this data outside of QEMU, LibVMI is unable to
implement this feature for KVM.)

2) Register event support

MSR register events are only available for Xen version 4.3 and newer.

3) Interrupt event support

INT3 events for Xen version 4.1.x and newer. Best supported by 4.2.3 and newer.

INT3 events are reported via the event facilities of Xen for only the
1-byte 0xCC variant of the operation.  The 2-byte 0xCD imm8 variant which takes
the interrupt vector as an operand (i.e., 0xCD03) is NOT reported in the
same fashion (Note: This observation is valid at time of writing for Xen 4.3
and earlier.) Because only 0xCC is in play for this class of event, the
instruction length involved is always one byte.

Warning: For INT3 to be handled correctly by the VM kernel and subsequently
passed on to the debugger within a VM (via OS-specified signalling mechanism),
the trap must be re-injected. Failure to do so may constitute a serious error.

Warning: Xen version prior to Xen 4.7 don't report the INT3 instruction length
to the event subscriber. While normally INT3 has an instruction length of 1,
a malicious guest could add superflous prefixes and thus changing the instruction
length. This could lead to the guest discovering external monitoring of INT3
instructions.

4) Memory events race-condition

In order to allow page-accesses by the guest to continue, it is normally
necessary to change the memory permissions, otherwise the guest will forever
fault. Doing so requires special attention as lifting memory permissions
may result in events going unreported in case there are multiple vCPUs attached
to the guest. It is advised to either use features such as altp2m or emulation
to avoid (or at least limit) the racecondition.

5) Xen version capabilities

Xen memory events in general are only supported for Xen 4.1.2 and newer.

6) Documentation bias

At the time this document was first written, Xen was the only hypervisor
with an events framework supported by LibVMI. As such, some of the behavior
described may be Xen-specific; however, it is expected that similar or identical
operations will be provided by all such hypervisors.
